Ten things you may not know about Wikipedia.
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Ten_things_you_may_not_know_about_Wikipedia>


  Fainting goat


      From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation <#column-one>, search <#searchInput>
A young fainting goat in the midst of a myotonic "fainting" spell.
</wiki/Image:Fainted.jpg>
</wiki/Image:Fainted.jpg>
A young fainting goat in the midst of a myotonic "fainting" spell.

A *fainting goat* is a breed of domestic goat </wiki/Domestic_goat>
whose muscles freeze for roughly 10 seconds when the goat is startled.
Though painless, this generally results in the animal collapsing on its
side. The characteristic is caused by a hereditary genetic disorder
</wiki/Genetic_disorder> called myotonia congenita
</wiki/Myotonia_congenita>. When startled, younger goats will stiffen
and fall over. Older goats learn to spread their legs or lean against
something when startled, and often they continue to run about in an
awkward, stiff-legged shuffle.

Slightly smaller than standard breeds of goat, fainting goats are
generally 43 to 64 centimeters </wiki/Centimeter> (17 to 25 in) tall and
can weigh anywhere from 27 to 75 kilograms </wiki/Kilogram> (50 to
165 lb </wiki/Pound_(mass)>). They have large, prominent eyes in high
sockets, and exist in as many colors as standard breeds do. Hair can be
short or long, with certain individuals producing a great deal of
cashmere </wiki/Cashmere_wool> during colder months. There appears to be
no angora </wiki/Angora_goat> strain of the fainting goat. Common coat
colors are black and white, however, most possible coat colors are found
in this breed. Their life expectancy is 12 to 15 years.^[1] <#cite_note-0>

The origin of the fainting goat is peculiar. The goats appear to have
arrived in Marshall County </wiki/Marshall_County,_Tennessee>, Tennessee
</wiki/Tennessee> in the early 1800s, courtesy of a reclusive farm
worker named Jon Tinsley who was most likely from Nova Scotia
</wiki/Nova_Scotia>. Before he left the area, he sold his goats — three
does and a buck — to Dr. H.H. Mayberry, who bred them.

Fainting goats have many other names, including Tennessee (Meat) Goats,
Nervous Goats, Stiff-leg Goats, Wooden-leg Goats, and Tennessee Scare
Goats. They are smaller and somewhat easier to care for and maintain
than larger meat goat breeds, which makes the fainting goat desirable
for smaller farms </wiki/Farm>. They are also raised as pet or show
animals as they can be friendly, intelligent, easy to keep, and amusing.


    Contents

[hide <javascript:toggleToc()>]

    * 1 Classification <#Classification>
    * 2 Molecular basis for myotonia in the goats
      <#Molecular_basis_for_myotonia_in_the_goats>
    * 3 Fainting Goat Festival <#Fainting_Goat_Festival>
    * 4 References <#References>
    * 5 External links <#External_links>


    [edit </w/index.php?title=Fainting_goat&action=edit&section=1>]
    Classification

Classified as a meat goat, as opposed to a dairy goat
</wiki/Dairy_goat>, it can be raised for /chevon/ (goat meat). This
breed is listed as threatened by the American Livestock Breeds
Conservancy </wiki/American_Livestock_Breeds_Conservancy> so the
fainting goat is not used as often for chevon as other meat goat breeds;
its rarity makes the live goat more valuable.^[2] <#cite_note-1> The
fainting goat is specifically specialized for smaller production
operations as they are unable to challenge fences as vigorously as
larger meat goat breeds, due in part to smaller size and also because of
the myotonia. They are a medium sized breed, with typical weights from
60-175 pounds, and this size makes them easier to care for chores such
as foot trimming and administering medications. Fainting goats are also
kept as pets, with the smaller specimens more frequently used to this end.

Besides the myotonia, other distinguishing features of the fainting goat
are prominently set eyes, where the eye protrudes from the eye socket,
as opposed to recessed eyes seen in other breeds. The profile is
straight as opposed to convex or "roman" profile.

In the past they were used for protecting livestock such as sheep by
involuntarily "sacrificing themselves" to predators, allowing the sheep
to escape.^[3] <#cite_note-2>


    [edit </w/index.php?title=Fainting_goat&action=edit&section=2>]
    Molecular basis for myotonia in the goats

A molecular basis for the defect in myotonic goats was studied by Beck
/et al./, who found a decrease in muscle chloride conductance due to
rabies </wiki/Rabies>. By using single-strand conformational analysis
they found that there were two mutations </wiki/Mutation> in the gene
</wiki/Gene> that encodes the skeletal muscle </wiki/Skeletal_muscle>
chloride channel </wiki/Chloride_channel> (ClC-1), one silent mutation
</wiki/Silent_mutation> which does not call for another amino acid
</wiki/Amino_acid> and then a missense mutation
</wiki/Missense_mutation> that calls a proline </wiki/Proline> instead
of an alanine </wiki/Alanine>. The mutation created a new MboII
restriction site </wiki/Restriction_site>, so they performed an allele
</wiki/Allele>-specific assay and found that all the myotonic goats had
the mutation, reinforcing its role of the missense mutation in the
disease.^[4] <#cite_note-3>

Physiologically, what is happening in these goats is the inability of
chloride ions </wiki/Chloride_ion> to act as a buffer to the action
potentials </wiki/Action_potential> as it does in normal animals.
Chloride is a negative ion found on the outside of cells in a much
higher concentration than on the inside, with an equilibrium potential
close to, or more negative, than the resting potential
</wiki/Resting_potential> to the cell. Normally, if there is a slight
depolarization </wiki/Depolarization> the influx of chloride will
counteract it acting as a buffer. It can be assumed then, with a lower
permeability to chloride it would take less of a depolarization to cause
an action potential, increasing the chance for erratic action
potentials. After an action potential there is a small rise in the
extracellular potassium </wiki/Potassium> levels that normally does not
affect the membrane potential much since it can be buffered by the
influx of the chloride ion. With myotonia the chloride ion cannot buffer
the increase in extracellular potassium which causes a 10-fold increase
in the effect of the potassium. If enough of these depolarizations
happen they can reach the threshold and cause spontaneous contractions
</wiki/Muscle_contraction>. Additionally, when the goats are startled,
there is a decrease in the threshold for an action potential due to
their increased arousal. It is easy to understand then, how when they
attempt to run away from someone scaring them, their lack of buffering
capability and their high arousal level can cause them to go into a
sustained contraction.


    [edit </w/index.php?title=Fainting_goat&action=edit&section=3>]
    Fainting Goat Festival

Every year in October, fainting goats are honored in Marshall County,
Tennessee. The festival </wiki/Festival> is centered on goats, but also
has activities including music, an arts and crafts show, food vendors,
and children's activities.^[5] <#cite_note-4>


    [edit </w/index.php?title=Fainting_goat&action=edit&section=4>]
    References

   1. *^ <#cite_ref-0>* "Tennessee Fainting Goats
      <http://www.rfaintingfarm.com/description.htm>". Retrieved on 2007
      </wiki/2007>-04-23 </wiki/April_23>.
   2. *^ <#cite_ref-1>* "American Livestock Breeds Conservancy Watchlist
      <http://www.albc-usa.org/cpl/wtchlist.html#goats>" (2007
      </wiki/2007>-12-12 </wiki/December_12>). Retrieved on 2006
      </wiki/2006>-07-11 </wiki/July_11>.
   3. *^ <#cite_ref-2>* "Fainting Goat
      <http://www.webworksltd.com/webpub/goats/faintinggoat.html>".
   4. *^ <#cite_ref-3>* Beck CL, Fahlke C, George AL Jr. 1996. Molecular
      basis for decreased muscle chloride conductance in the myotonic
      goat. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 93(20):11248-52
   5. *^ <#cite_ref-4>* "www.goatsmusicandmore.com/
      <http://www.goatsmusicandmore.com/>".


    [edit </w/index.php?title=Fainting_goat&action=edit&section=5>]
    External links

    * Myotonic Goat
      <http://www.dmoz.org/Business/Agriculture_and_Forestry/Livestock/Goats/Breeds/Myotonic//>
      at the Open Directory Project </wiki/Open_Directory_Project>
    * MGR - Myotonic Goat Registry - Registry
      <http://www.myotonicgoatregistry.net>
    * IFGA - International Fainting Goat Association - Registry
      <http://www.faintinggoat.com>
    * YouTube video of fainting goats
      <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=we9_CdNPuJg>

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fainting_goat"
Categories </wiki/Special:Categories>: Goat breeds
</wiki/Category:Goat_breeds> | ALBC Conservation Priority Breeds
</wiki/Category:ALBC_Conservation_Priority_Breeds> | Goats
</wiki/Category:Goats> | Marshall County, Tennessee
</wiki/Category:Marshall_County,_Tennessee>


          Views

    * Article </wiki/Fainting_goat>
    * Discussion </wiki/Talk:Fainting_goat>
    * Edit this page </w/index.php?title=Fainting_goat&action=edit>
    * History </w/index.php?title=Fainting_goat&action=history>


          Personal tools

    * Log in / create account
      </w/index.php?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=Fainting_goat>

</wiki/Main_Page>


          Navigation

    * Main page </wiki/Main_Page>
    * Contents </wiki/Portal:Contents>
    * Featured content </wiki/Portal:Featured_content>
    * Current events </wiki/Portal:Current_events>
    * Random article </wiki/Special:Random>


          Search

 


          Interaction

    * About Wikipedia </wiki/Wikipedia:About>
    * Community portal </wiki/Wikipedia:Community_portal>
    * Recent changes </wiki/Special:RecentChanges>
    * Contact Wikipedia </wiki/Wikipedia:Contact_us>
    * Donate to Wikipedia <http://wikimediafoundation.org/wiki/Donate>
    * Help </wiki/Help:Contents>


          Toolbox

    * What links here </wiki/Special:WhatLinksHere/Fainting_goat>
    * Related changes </wiki/Special:RecentChangesLinked/Fainting_goat>
    * Upload file </wiki/Wikipedia:Upload>
    * Special pages </wiki/Special:SpecialPages>
    * Printable version </w/index.php?title=Fainting_goat&printable=yes>
    * Permanent link </w/index.php?title=Fainting_goat&oldid=239200892>
    * Cite this page
      </w/index.php?title=Special:Cite&page=Fainting_goat&id=239200892>


          Languages

    * Bosanski <http://bs.wikipedia.org/wiki/Padaju%C4%87a_koza>
    * Ελληνικά
      <http://el.wikipedia.org/wiki/%CE%9C%CF%85%CE%BF%CF%84%CE%BF%CE%BD%CE%B9%CE%BA%CE%AE_%CE%BA%CE%B1%CF%84%CF%83%CE%AF%CE%BA%CE%B1>
    * עברית
      <http://he.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D7%A2%D7%96_%D7%9E%D7%AA%D7%A2%D7%9C%D7%A4%D7%AA>

Powered by MediaWiki <http://www.mediawiki.org/>
Wikimedia Foundation <http://wikimediafoundation.org/>

    * This page was last modified on 18 September 2008, at 05:34.
    * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free
      Documentation License
      <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text_of_the_GNU_Free_Documentation_License>.
      (See *Copyrights
      <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Copyrights>* for details.)
      Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation,
      Inc <http://www.wikimediafoundation.org>., a U.S. registered
      501(c)(3)
      <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/501%28c%29#501.28c.29.283.29>
      tax-deductible
      <http://wikimediafoundation.org/wiki/Deductibility_of_donations>
      nonprofit <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-profit_organization>
      charity <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charitable_organization>.
    * Privacy policy <http://wikimediafoundation.org/wiki/Privacy_policy>
    * About Wikipedia </wiki/Wikipedia:About>
    * Disclaimers </wiki/Wikipedia:General_disclaimer>

